Part 1: SQL vs NoSQL

This is the most common data question in interviews, and the wrong instinct is to have a favorite. The senior instinct: "it depends on the data shape and access pattern — here's how I'd decide." Let's give you that decision framework.

The Two Families
SQL (relational) — the world you know: MySQL, PostgreSQL. Data lives in tables with a fixed schema (columns defined up front, types enforced). Rows relate to each other via foreign keys, and you JOIN across tables. You already speak this — your employee/department schema with deptno linking them is the canonical example.

NoSQL (non-relational) — an umbrella for databases that don't use the rigid table/relational model. Flexible or no fixed schema, and they're built to scale horizontally (across many machines) more easily than traditional SQL. "NoSQL" is actually four different things — let's see them, because interviewers expect you to know the sub-types.

The Four Types of NoSQL
1. Key-Value stores — the simplest: a giant distributed HashMap. You put a value at a key, you get it back by key. That's it. Blazing fast, but you can only look things up by key (no "find all users in Bangalore"). Examples: Redis, DynamoDB. Use for: caching, sessions, real-time lookups. (This is literally the Redis you've used — Redis is a key-value NoSQL store.)
2. Document stores — store JSON-like documents. Each document is a self-contained object, and different documents can have different fields (flexible schema). Example: MongoDB. Use when your data is naturally object-shaped and you want to store it without rigid tables — a product with nested variants, a user with an embedded address list. Think: storing a Java object as JSON without an ORM flattening it into rows.
3. Wide-Column stores — tables, but each row can have different columns, and they're optimized for massive scale and heavy writes. Examples: Cassandra, HBase. Use for: time-series, logging, IoT, analytics at huge write volumes. (Remember your write-heavy scaling from yesterday? This is a write-heavy database.)
4. Graph databases — store nodes and relationships as first-class things, optimized for "who is connected to whom" queries. Example: Neo4j. Use for: social networks (friends-of-friends), recommendation engines, fraud rings. A query like "friends of friends who like X" is painful in SQL (many JOINs) but native here.

The Real Difference: Schema & Scale
Schema — rigid vs flexible
SQL: schema defined up front, enforced. Add a column = a migration. Structure guaranteed — every row has the same shape. Great when data is structured and consistent (financial records, orders).
NoSQL: flexible/no schema. Add a field to one document freely. Great when data is varied or evolving (user profiles where everyone fills different fields, rapidly changing product) — but you now bear responsibility for consistency the DB no longer enforces.

Scaling — vertical vs horizontal (the big one).

Traditional SQL scales vertically most naturally (bigger box). Scaling it horizontally is possible but hard — JOINs and transactions across machines are painful (you'll feel exactly why in the sharding part). This is SQL's Achilles' heel at massive scale.
NoSQL is built horizontal from day one — designed to spread across hundreds of nodes. That's the whole reason NoSQL rose: web-scale companies hit SQL's horizontal-scaling wall. NoSQL often achieves this by giving up cross-table JOINs and multi-record ACID transactions — the very things that make horizontal scaling hard. It's a trade.

The Decision Framework (what to actually say)

Choose SQL when:
Data is structured with clear relationships (users→orders→items)
You need ACID transactions — operations that must be all-or-nothing (money transfers, inventory, bookings)
You need complex queries/JOINs and ad-hoc reporting
Scale is moderate (millions of rows — one good SQL box or SQL + replicas handles a lot)

Choose NoSQL when:
Massive scale / horizontal is non-negotiable (billions of records, huge write volume)
Data is unstructured or schema evolves fast
Access is simple (lookups by key) — you don't need rich JOINs
You can trade strict consistency for scale and availability (social feeds, product catalogs, logs, real-time analytics)

The honest nuance interviewers love: the line is blurrier in 2026. Postgres has strong JSON support (document-style within SQL) and can scale further than people assume; some NoSQL (like DynamoDB) offers transactions now. So the mature take is: "Start with the data shape and access pattern, not a favorite. Relational + transactional + moderate scale → SQL. Simple access at massive horizontal scale, or flexible schema → the matching NoSQL type. And most real systems use both — polyglot persistence."

Polyglot persistence — the term for using multiple databases in one system, each for what it's best at. E.g. Postgres for orders/payments (needs ACID), Redis for sessions/cache, Elasticsearch for search, Cassandra for the activity log. This is the realistic answer for any non-trivial design, and it directly matches your Rooted Nest instincts — orders in a relational DB, cache in Redis.

"I don't pick a database by preference — I start from the data's shape, relationships, consistency needs, and scale. Structured and transactional → SQL. Massive-scale, simple-access, or flexible-schema → the right NoSQL type. In practice systems are polyglot: SQL for the transactional core, Redis for caching, and a wide-column or document store where scale or flexibility demands it."

Your app handles money transfers between accounts. SQL or NoSQL, and what's the one-word reason?
A money transfer is two operations that must succeed or fail together:
1. Debit ₹1000 from Account A
2. Credit ₹1000 to Account B
ACID 
A — Atomicity: all-or-nothing.
C — Consistency: the DB moves from one valid state to another, never breaking rules.
I — Isolation: concurrent transactions don't corrupt each other
D — Durability: once committed, it's permanent — survives crashes, power loss (written to disk, not just RAM). 

Part 2: Indexing
This is one of the most satisfying topics for a SQL learner, because it explains something you've definitely seen — why the same query is instant on one table and painfully slow on another. And it shows up in both system design rounds and SQL interview rounds, so it's high-value.

The Problem: Finding a Row
SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'prajwal@gmail.com';

Your users table has 10 million rows. How does the database find this one?
Without an index: it does a full table scan — it literally checks row 1, row 2, row 3... all the way through, comparing each email until it finds a match (or reaches the end). For 10 million rows, that's up to 10 million comparisons. This is O(N) — linear, and it gets slower as your table grows. This is exactly why a query that was fast when your table had 1,000 rows crawls once it hits millions.

The Solution: An Index
An index is a separate, sorted data structure that lets the database jump to the row instead of scanning for it. The perfect analogy — and the one to say in interviews:

An index is like the index at the back of a textbook. Want to find "photosynthesis"? You don't read all 800 pages (full scan). You flip to the alphabetical index, find "photosynthesis → page 342," and jump straight there. The index is sorted, so finding the term is fast, and it points to the real location.

A database index is the same: a sorted structure of (email → pointer to the actual row on disk). Because it's sorted, the database finds the entry in O(log N) — a handful of hops instead of millions of comparisons. For 10 million rows, that's roughly 23 comparisons instead of 10 million. That's the difference between microseconds and seconds.

"how does an index work under the hood?" The answer: most databases implement indexes as a B-tree (specifically a B+ tree).
What's Actually Inside: the B-Tree

Think of it as a sorted tree that stays balanced and shallow. You start at the root, which splits the range (e.g. "emails before M go left, after M go right"), then each level narrows further, until in just a few hops you reach the leaf that points to your row. Because the tree is balanced, every lookup takes the same small number of hops — that's the O(log N).

Two properties worth naming:
It stays sorted, so it's great not just for exact matches (= 'prajwal@...') but also ranges (WHERE age BETWEEN 25 AND 30, ORDER BY, <, >) — you find the start and walk along the sorted leaves.
It's the reason a primary key is automatically indexed — that's why lookups by ID are always fast.

(One contrast to drop for depth: some databases/indexes use a hash index instead — a HashMap giving O(1) exact-match lookups, but useless for ranges because hashing destroys order. B-trees are the default because they handle both equality and ranges. This directly connects to yesterday: hashing = fast exact lookup, no ordering.)

The Catch — Indexes Aren't Free (the trade-off interviewers want)
If indexes make reads this fast, why not index every column? Because they cost:

1. Slower writes. Every INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE must now also update every index on that table — the B-tree has to be kept sorted and balanced. Index 5 columns → every write does 5 extra index updates. So indexes speed up reads but slow down writes. This ties straight back to yesterday's read-heavy vs write-heavy: index generously on read-heavy tables; be sparing on write-heavy ones.
2. Storage. Each index is a whole extra data structure on disk. More indexes = more disk.
So it's a classic trade: read speed vs write speed + storage. The senior instinct: "index the columns you frequently query/filter/join on — not every column."

What to Actually Index (practical, interview-ready)
Columns in WHERE clauses (you filter by them)
Columns used in JOIN conditions (foreign keys)
Columns in ORDER BY (index keeps them pre-sorted)
High-selectivity columns — ones with many distinct values (email, user_id). Indexing a column like gender (2 values) is nearly useless — the index can't narrow much, so the DB may just scan anyway.

Composite index bonus: you can index multiple columns together, e.g. (last_name, first_name). But order matters — it works like a phone book sorted by last name then first name: great for "find Sharma, Prajwal" or "all Sharmas," useless for "find all Prajwals" (first name alone). Mentioning "leftmost prefix rule" here signals real depth.

"An index is a sorted B-tree structure that turns a query from an O(N) full table scan into an O(log N) lookup — like a book's index instead of reading every page. I index columns I filter, join, or sort on, favoring high-selectivity columns. The trade-off is that every index slows writes and costs storage, since each write must update every index — so I index read-heavy tables generously and write-heavy ones sparingly."

Part 3: Replication.
Replication = keeping copies of your database on multiple machines. Instead of one database server, you run several, each holding a full copy of the data, kept in sync.
Replication solves two distinct problems at once:

Problem 1 — Availability (redundancy for data). If you have one database and it dies, your entire application is down and — worse than a dead app server — you risk losing the data. A database is stateful; it's the crown jewel. So you keep copies. One dies, another has all the data. This is the SPOF-elimination reflex from Part 4 yesterday, applied to the most critical component.
Problem 2 — Read scaling. Remember yesterday's estimation: most systems are read-heavy (our photo app was 50:1 reads:writes). A single database can only handle so many queries/sec. With copies, you can spread reads across all of them — 3 replicas ≈ 3× the read capacity. Reads scale by adding machines.

The Standard Pattern: Primary–Replica
one boss, several copies:
Primary (also called leader/master) — the only node that accepts writes (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE). There's exactly one, so there's a single source of truth for changes.
Replicas (followers/read-replicas) — copies that accept reads only. Every change the primary makes gets copied to the replicas to keep them in sync.

The routing rule your app follows: send writes → primary, send reads → any replica. Since reads vastly outnumber writes in most systems, offloading them to replicas takes enormous pressure off the primary. (This is often done with two connection pools, or a proxy that routes by query type.)
Why one writer? If multiple nodes accepted writes, two of them could change the same row at the same time to different values — and now which copy is correct? Conflict. A single primary sidesteps this entirely: all writes funnel through one place, so there's always one authoritative order of changes. (There is a multi-writer model — "multi-primary" — but it brings exactly those conflict-resolution headaches, so single-primary is the default.)

The Catch: Replication Lag (the key trade-off)
Copying changes from primary to replicas takes time — usually milliseconds, but not zero. That gap creates replication lag, and it leads to the single most important concept here:
You write to the primary, then immediately read from a replica that hasn't received the update yet — so you read stale (old) data.

Concrete example: you update your profile photo (write → primary). The page reloads and reads from Replica 2 (→ hasn't gotten the change yet) → you still see your old photo. Confusing. This is the classic replication-lag bug, and it's the root of a concept coming in Part 6: eventual consistency — the replicas will catch up (become consistent) eventually, but not instantly.

This is a genuine trade-off, and here's how to talk about the two flavors:
Asynchronous replication (the common default): the primary confirms the write to the user immediately, then copies to replicas in the background. Fast writes, but replicas can briefly lag → you can read stale data. Most systems accept this.

Synchronous replication: the primary waits until replicas confirm they've received the write before telling the user "done." No stale reads (replicas are always current), but slower writes (every write waits for replicas), and if a replica is down, writes can stall.

async = fast but stale-prone; sync = consistent but slow.

What if the primary dies? It's the SPOF of this setup (only it takes writes). The answer is the same reflex as the load balancer: automatic failover — one of the replicas gets promoted to become the new primary, and writes start flowing to it. This can be automatic (the system detects the dead primary and elects a replica) or manual. Modern databases and managed services handle this largely automatically.

Since interviewers love the stale-read problem, know the common fixes:
Read from primary for data you just wrote (e.g. right after updating your profile, read your profile from the primary, not a replica). Cheap and common.
"Read-your-writes" consistency — route a user's reads to the primary for a short window after they write.
Accept the staleness where it doesn't matter (a slightly stale like-count is fine).

Replication is how the stateful data layer achieves what stateless app servers got for free. Your app servers scale by just adding identical copies (Part 6 yesterday). The database can't do that trivially, because it holds state — so replication is the mechanism that gives it redundancy (availability) and read-scaling, at the cost of consistency lag.
But replication does NOT solve one problem: it doesn't help you store more data than fits on one machine — every replica holds the full copy. If your data is 100 TB, every replica needs 100 TB. Replication multiplies read capacity and gives redundancy, but not storage capacity or write capacity (still one primary). That problem — too much data/writes for one machine — is what sharding solves, and that's Part 4.

 "I'd use primary-replica replication: all writes go to a single primary, reads spread across replicas — which scales reads and gives redundancy, since most systems are read-heavy. The trade-off is replication lag: with async replication a read from a replica can be stale, so for read-your-own-writes cases I route those reads to the primary. On primary failure, a replica is promoted. But replication doesn't scale writes or storage — every replica holds the full dataset — so for that I'd shard."

Part 4: Sharding
This is the hardest and most impressive data-layer topic. Replication solved reads and redundancy but left two problems untouched: too much data for one machine, and too many writes for one machine (still one primary). Sharding solves both — at real cost.

Replication copies the whole dataset to every node. So if your data is 100 TB, every replica needs 100 TB — you haven't gained storage, just copies. And every write still funnels through one primary, so write throughput is capped by one machine.
Two walls, one machine can't clear:
Storage: the dataset is bigger than any single disk (your photo app: 100 TB/day).
Write throughput: more writes/sec than one primary can handle.

Sharding = splitting your data into pieces and putting each piece on a different machine. Not copies — different data on each. Machine 1 holds some rows, machine 2 holds others, machine 3 holds the rest. Together they store far more than any one could, and each handles only its slice of the writes.
The interview definition: replication = same data, many copies (scales reads). Sharding = different data, split across machines (scales writes + storage). They're complementary — real systems do both (each shard is itself replicated). Saying that sentence shows you understand they solve different problems.

Each shard is its own database holding a subset —
together they store more than one machine ever could

The critical decision in sharding is: for a given row, which shard does it live on? You pick a shard key (a column) and a rule that maps key → shard. When a query comes in, a router computes the shard from the key and sends the query there.

The two main strategies:
1. Hash-based sharding (shown above). Take the shard key, hash it, mod by shard count: shard = hash(user_id) % 3. User 1001 always hashes to the same shard, so you always know where to find them
-> Pro: even, random distribution — no shard gets overloaded (hashing spreads keys uniformly). This directly prevents hotspots.
-> Con: range queries are painful. "All users who signed up in January" — consecutive users hash to different shards, so you must query every shard and merge. Hashing destroys ordering (you saw this exact trade-off with hash indexes in Part 2 — same principle, bigger scale).

2. Range-based sharding. Split by ranges of the key: users A–H → shard 1, I–P → shard 2, Q–Z → shard 3. (Or by date: Jan–Apr → shard 1, etc.)
-> Pro: range queries are efficient — "all users I–P" hits one shard; data stays ordered.
-> Con: uneven distribution / hotspots. If you shard by first letter, 'S' (lots of Sharmas, Singhs) gets a huge shard while 'X' is nearly empty. If you shard user activity by date, today's shard takes all the write traffic while old shards sit idle — a hotspot that defeats the purpose.

The trade-off in one line: hash = even load but no range queries; range = range queries but risk of hotspots. Choosing the shard key and strategy is the whole art, and interviewers probe it.

Choosing a Good Shard Key (this is what they're really testing)
A good shard key has three properties:
High cardinality — many distinct values, so data can spread finely. (Sharding by a boolean = only 2 shards possible. Bad.)
Even distribution — no single value dominates, or that shard becomes a hotspot.
Matches your access pattern — you should usually query by the shard key, so requests hit one shard, not all of them.

user_id is often ideal: millions of distinct values, evenly spread, and most queries are "get this user's data" → lands on one shard. Sharding a social app by user_id means each user's data sits on one shard — a profile fetch is a single-shard query.

Sharding is powerful but genuinely hard
1. Cross-shard queries are expensive
2. JOINs across shards break down. if users are on shard 1 and their orders landed on shard 3, the database can't JOIN across separate machines efficiently. You end up doing joins in application code, or denormalizing (duplicating data so related things live together). 
3. Transactions across shards are hard. 
4. Resharding is a nightmare. Here's the classic interview trap. You used hash(user_id) % 3. Now you add a 4th shard → the formula becomes % 4 → almost every user now maps to a different shard → you must physically move most of your data while the system is live.

The fix for the resharding nightmare is consistent hashing — the technique that lets you add/remove shards while moving only a small fraction of the data (roughly 1/N), not almost all of it.

When data or write volume exceeds one machine, I shard — split data across machines by a shard key. I'd pick a high-cardinality, evenly-distributed key that matches the access pattern, like user_id, so most queries hit a single shard. Hash-based sharding gives even distribution but weak range queries; range-based is the reverse and risks hotspots. The hard costs are cross-shard queries, joins, and transactions — which is exactly SQL's horizontal-scaling pain — so I denormalize to keep related data together. And I'd use consistent hashing so adding shards moves only a small fraction of data instead of resharding everything.

Part 5: CAP Theorem

CAP says a distributed system (data spread across multiple machines — exactly the replication/sharding world we just built) can guarantee at most two of these three:

C — Consistency: every read returns the most recent write. All nodes show the same data at the same time. Read after a write → you see that write, never stale data. (Note: this is a stricter "C" than the C in ACID — here it means all copies agree.)
A — Availability: every request gets a response (non-error), always. The system is always up and answering, even if some nodes are down.
P — Partition tolerance: the system keeps working even when the network between nodes fails — messages are lost or delayed, and nodes can't talk to each other. This is called a network partition (a "split brain" — the cluster is cut into groups that can't communicate).

Here's the truth: in any real distributed system, network partitions WILL happen — cables cut, switches fail, packets drop, a data center loses connectivity. You cannot choose to not have partitions any more than you can choose for it to never rain. So P is not optional — you must tolerate partitions or your system falls apart when (not if) the network hiccups.

That means P is mandatory, so the real choice is only between C and A — and only during a partition. CAP is really asking:
When the network splits and your nodes can't sync — do you sacrifice Consistency (serve possibly-stale data but stay up) or Availability (refuse requests to avoid serving wrong data)?

When the network splits and your nodes can't sync — do you sacrifice Consistency (serve possibly-stale data but stay up) or Availability (refuse requests to avoid serving wrong data)?

So it's not "2 of 3." It's: P is a given; when a partition strikes, choose C or A. The diagram above shows exactly this fork. State it that way and you've demonstrated real understanding, not a memorized triangle.

The Two Real Choices: CP vs AP

The Two Real Choices: CP vs AP
When a partition happens and Node A can't reach Node B:
CP (Consistency + Partition tolerance) — sacrifice availability. To avoid serving wrong data, the system refuses to respond (errors out or blocks) on the side that can't confirm it has the latest data, until the nodes reconnect and sync. You'll never get stale/wrong data — but some requests fail (partial downtime).

Choose when correctness is non-negotiable: banking, inventory, bookings. Better to show "try again" than to let two people book the last seat or overdraw an account. (Money again — consistency beats availability.)
Examples: traditional RDBMS, MongoDB, HBase, Zookeeper.

AP (Availability + Partition tolerance) — sacrifice consistency. The system always responds, even if a node isn't sure it has the newest data — it serves what it has and reconciles later (eventual consistency, Part 6). Always up — but you might read briefly stale data.

Choose when being up matters more than perfect freshness: social feeds, product catalogs, likes, shopping carts. A slightly stale like-count or feed is totally fine; being down loses money and users.
Examples: Cassandra, DynamoDB, Riak, most caches.

The deciding question to ask in an interview: "During a partition, is it worse to be wrong or to be down?" Wrong is unacceptable → CP. Down is unacceptable → AP. That single question drives the choice, and it maps to the read-heavy/business-critical distinction you already know.

CAP says a distributed system facing a network partition must choose consistency or availability — and since partitions are inevitable, P isn't optional, so the real choice is C vs A during a partition. CP systems like RDBMS refuse requests to stay correct — right for money and inventory. AP systems like Cassandra stay up and reconcile later — right for feeds and catalogs. The question I ask is: during a partition, is it worse to be wrong or to be down? And modern stores let me tune this per-operation

Part 6: Consistency Models & Transactions at Scale 
Strong vs Eventual Consistency (the spectrum above)
Strong consistency — after a write completes, every read (from any node) returns that new value. Immediately. There's a single, always-current view of the data. This is what you intuitively expect from a database, and what a single un-replicated SQL DB gives you naturally.

Cost: to guarantee every node agrees before responding, the system must coordinate/wait (synchronous replication, or reads from the primary). That means slower and, per CAP, less available during partitions (it's the CP choice).
Use when: correctness is critical — account balances, inventory counts, "did my payment go through." (Money, again.)

Eventual consistency — after a write, reads might return stale data for a short while, but if writes stop, all nodes eventually converge to the same value. It's "consistent... eventually." This is the replication-lag behavior from Part 3, embraced as a deliberate model.

Benefit: no waiting for all nodes to agree → fast and highly available (the AP choice). Nodes can accept reads/writes independently and reconcile later.
Use when: brief staleness is harmless — social feeds, like counts, view counts, product catalogs, DNS (remember DNS propagation? that's eventual consistency!).
The catch: your application must tolerate stale reads. Fine for a like-count; unacceptable for a bank balance.

ACID vs BASE — Two Philosophies
You know ACID (Part 1) — the SQL/strong-consistency philosophy: Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability. Correctness first.
The NoSQL world coined a deliberate counter-philosophy, BASE:

BA — Basically Available: the system is (almost) always available (AP leaning).
S — Soft state: data may be "in flux" / not settled (because copies are reconciling).
E — Eventual consistency: it converges over time.

The pun is intentional — chemistry: acid vs base. ACID prioritizes consistency; BASE prioritizes availability. They're the two ends of the CAP trade-off expressed as design philosophies:

ACID (traditional SQL): strong consistency, transactions — correctness over availability. → banking, orders, inventory.
BASE (many NoSQL): availability and scale — accept eventual consistency. → feeds, catalogs, analytics, high-scale writes.

ACID favors consistency and transactional correctness — right for the financial core. BASE favors availability and scale, accepting eventual consistency — right for feeds and catalogs. It's the CAP trade-off as a design philosophy, and in a polyglot system I'd use both: ACID SQL for payments, BASE NoSQL for the activity feed

Transactions at Scale: the Cross-Shard Problem
Here's where it gets hard. A transaction on one machine is easy — the database handles ACID locally (BEGIN...COMMIT). But once you shard (Part 4), a transaction may need to touch rows on different machines. Now what?
Example: transfer money where Account A is on Shard 1 and Account B is on Shard 3. You must debit on Shard 1 and credit on Shard 3 — atomically, all-or-nothing, across two separate databases. If Shard 1 commits but Shard 3 crashes, money vanishes. Local ACID can't help — no single database sees both.
Solution 1 — Two-Phase Commit (2PC). A coordinator orchestrates a distributed transaction in two phases:

Prepare phase: coordinator asks every shard "can you commit this?" Each does the work tentatively and replies "yes, ready" (locking the rows) or "no."
Commit phase: if all said yes → coordinator tells everyone "commit!" If any said no → "abort!" everyone rolls back.

This gives real atomicity across shards — but the costs are heavy: it's slow (multiple round trips, everyone waits), it holds locks the whole time (hurting concurrency), and the coordinator is a SPOF (if it dies mid-commit, shards are stuck holding locks, unsure whether to commit — "blocking"). So 2PC works but doesn't scale well and hurts availability. Interviewers want you to know it exists and why it's avoided at scale.
Solution 2 — the Saga pattern (the modern, scalable answer). Instead of one atomic distributed transaction, break it into a sequence of local transactions, each on one shard/service, with compensating actions to undo if a later step fails.
Money transfer as a saga:

Debit A (local commit on Shard 1) →
Credit B (local commit on Shard 3) →
If step 2 fails → run a compensating transaction: re-credit A (undo step 1).

No global lock, no coordinator holding everything — each step commits locally and immediately. If something fails partway, you compensate (semantically undo) the completed steps. This is eventually consistent (there's a window where A is debited but B isn't yet credited), but it scales and stays available — which is why microservices architectures use sagas instead of 2PC. This connects directly to your world: in a microservices system, each service owns its own database, so every cross-service business operation is a distributed-transaction problem, and sagas are the standard solution.
The trade-off: 2PC = strong atomicity but slow, locking, and blocking; Saga = scalable and available but eventually consistent and more complex to design (you must write compensating logic for every step).
Interview soundbite: "A transaction on one shard is normal ACID. Across shards, I have two options: two-phase commit gives atomicity but is slow, lock-heavy, and the coordinator is a SPOF — so it doesn't scale. At scale, especially with microservices where each service owns its data, I'd use the Saga pattern: a sequence of local transactions with compensating actions to undo on failure. It trades strong atomicity for eventual consistency, but it's available and scalable."

This is why distributing data is genuinely hard, and why people avoid sharding until they must: the moment data lives on multiple machines, the clean ACID guarantees you rely on in a single SQL database stop being free. You're forced into distributed transactions (2PC/Saga) and consistency trade-offs. Keep transactions single-shard when you possibly can — design your shard key so related data (a user and their orders) lands on the same shard, avoiding cross-shard transactions entirely. That's a senior design instinct: shard to keep transactional data co-located.



































